Title: When am I Done™?
Date: 10-08-2016
Tags: gradschool, life, rules
Summary: Seriously, when?
Slug: milestones


This week I realized I still pretty much have no idea what I'm doing in
grad school.  Yes, I'm only a month in, but hear me out.

During my undergrad, I would have biweekly quizzes, which gave me a grade,
which gave me some feedback on how I was doing, and what had to be
improved.  Two week cycle, starting around a month in.

During my job as programmer, complete projects wouldn't last more than a
few months, and I could see at least a sketch of my work in the test server
in seven days after I first coded them.  This started about a month after
the training period was over.  Fast project turnover and even faster
development cycle.

When I was a teacher, I could know if a class had gone well or bad
instantly by the end of it.  Instant feedback.

In grad school, I have no quizzes, development cycles, nor have to teach
class.  All my deadlines are "by the end of the semester/year", which can
mean any date within the span of four or five weeks.  Since I'm at a new
program, there are very few students to take advice from (although their
advice has been invaluable up to now), and I'm not close enough with most
professors to sit down and take life advice.  *Life* advice, not *grad
school* advice, because grad school *is* my life for the time being.  Which
takes me to my next point.

I've been working between 10 and 12 hours a day since day one.  On
weekends, I'm doing between 6 and 8.  On an average weekday, I sleep 7
hours each night, my commute takes 1 hour total, and I usually take 1 hour
for lunch.  This leaves around 4 hours to eat breakfast and dinner, shower,
buy groceries, cook, exercise, etc.  Honestly, I'm not complaining.  I
signed up for this, the rhythm is exactly what I expected, and I think I'm
doing well enough for now.

However, all of this takes me to the crux of the problem.  I never know
when I am **Done™**.  By **Done™** I mean reaching a point in whatever I'm
doing (reading papers, doing research, working on class projects, other
type of paperwork, debugging code, whiteboarding/brainstorming with someone
else, etc) such that I'm satisfied with my progress, and I consider it a
good stopping point.  Basically, I don't know when to stop.

During my undergrad, I would be **Done™** when I covered the material for
the next quiz.  When developing I would mark some important commits as
being **Done™**.  Being **Done™** means I've reached a milestone, I can
take a short break, celebrate a small victory, learn from a failure, or
just call it a day and go home.  Now in grad school I never feel like I'm
**Done™**, because there is always one more paper to read, and one more bug
to squash, and one more page to type and render in LaTeX, and one more step
in the research project that I'm currently working on, and so on and so
forth.

For advice, I turn to the Recurse Center.  (If you haven't clicked on the
link at the bottom of this page, you very much should.)  Here is a short
summary of things they said about grad school in general.  I do not presume
to distill all their wisdom in a meager list, but this is sort of the gist.
By the way, I'm not being sarcastic, this is truly an amazing community.
Anyway, this is what I got out of it, plus my thoughts after going over
each piece of advice a couple of times.

---------------


### I shouldn't work for so many hours

I don't want to come across as bragging about how much I work (I don't even
think that's anything worth bragging about), but I don't think that 10-12
hours is too many.  Like I said before, I signed up for this, and I didn't
wait for 10 years to come to grad school to only work 9 to 5 and then call
it a day.


### I should stay healthy

I'm trying really hard to be mindful of my health.  I force myself to sleep
at least 7 hours, which might actually go up soon because I'm about to
start swimming again.  I'm watching what I eat (with the occasional ice
cream here or there), I'm drinking lots of water, commuting by bike,
standing up from my desk at least twice every hour, meditating most
mornings, and keeping my room and lab desk tidy and clean.  I make time
specifically for all this and I'm actually learning to enjoy it.


### I should keep a to-do list

I will leave this one for the end.


### I shouldn't jump around too many things at once

I had this problem for the first couple of weeks.  Each day I would start
with the most urgent thing, and as soon as I was **Done™**, I would go to
the second most urgent thing.  This made me feel like I was always behind
and that the thing I was doing at that particular moment was the most
important thing in the world, so I had to finish it, and quickly.  This was
the wrong perspective because, as mentioned before, most my deadlines are
reasonably far, but by tackling "the most urgent" thing, I always felt like
I had to rush to finish.

Now I'm experimenting with having designated tasks for different days.  For
example, Thursday is research day.  I spend as much time as possible doing
ONLY research, throughout the day.  This has been working wonderfully,
since it not only lets me focus on the one thing, without worrying about
"the most urgent" task, but also because it gives me something to look
forward to during the week.  On any given day, whatever task I'm focusing
on, I can tell myself that I have to finish it, not because it's urgent,
but just so that I can spend one full Thursday with my research.  In this
perspective, I can feel I'm **Done™** for a day when I've finished that
task (or progressed enough) so that on Thursday I won't feel bad for
neglecting it.


### I should get used to not having feedback

"Get used to it" is a perfectly good answer to this whole thing.  Grad
school doesn't have to be like undergrad, a programming job, teaching, or
like anything else for that matter.  It's its own particular beast, and
getting used to having very little feedback, and when present, having it be
NEGATIVE feedback, is part of the process.  Reminds me of Becket's famous
"try again, fail again, fail better" quote.  I think this is a worthy rule
to add to my life style.  I should do things because they're necessary,
interesting, or fun, not because someone gave me a good grade for doing it.


### I should get used to tackling larger projects

Again, this comes back to the whole point of grad school.  It will take
longer to know how I'm doing in my projects *because* they're supposed to
be research.  If people knew exactly how to evaluate my current projects,
they probably wouldn't be considered PhD worthy.


### I should have a clear limit to my workday each day

This is an important one that I hadn't thought of before.  I think I should
probably designate tasks as either "lab-worthy" and "home-worthy".
Lab-worthy tasks I can and must do at the lab, like reading important
papers, doing research, or performing lengthy computations and writing
code.  Home-worthy tasks can be done from home, taking longer breaks, don't
take as much time, and could be considered leisure activities.  Some
home-worthy tasks would be doing code review on a personal side project,
reading a general interest paper or book, writing for
[erdos](http://erdosnet.work/) or my blog.  These are things that, if I
don't do them, there is no repercussion.  In that sense, they are as
important as chilling while watching some TV (which I still do sometimes).
Thus, they do not count toward being **Done™**.


### I should work until I have "a meeting's worth"

I think this is a great one.  It means that I should work (at least) until
I have enough to talk about during my weekly meeting with my adviser.  If I
have enough done to fill a meeting's worth, then I'm **Done™**.

I think it's super convenient to think this way, especially because my
adviser lets me roam freely and explore stuff, but she is also demanding
and has great expectations of me.  I think we're going to get a long
wonderfully.


### I should let the small stuff slide

Similarly to having a limit to my workday, the little things don't usually
count toward being **Done™**.  Say I'm writing up a homework in LaTeX,
after having finished it successfully.  Does it really make a difference if
that one equation isn't perfectly aligned?  Does it really matter if one of
the parts of one of the questions isn't as elegant as I would like to?
This is also a dangerous one because it could lead to a slippery-slope kind
of situation, but I'm confident that I won't let myself fall into that
trap.


### I should set aside time to do extracurricular activities

I've been trying to get in the habit of scheduling some extracurricular
things with the same care as the school-related responsibilities.  I will
schedule everything from my grocery shopping and cooking to when I Skype
with family and friends (both because they are as important and so that I
don't forget).  This way, every time I look at my calendar (I must be
looking at it a few dozen times a day), all my activities have the same
importance, and school doesn't take major precedence over all the other
things (at least not all the time).


### I should dedicate most (all) of my time to things that are productive or fulfilling.

This goes in line with my old rule of only doing things that are necessary,
interesting, or fun, and *only while* they are necessary, interesting, or
fun.


---------------


I have let the one about to-do lists last because it's one of the most
important things I'm doing.  A big chunk of my grad school experience up to
now is being able to 1) organize my stuff in to-do lists and 2) dump all my
brain's contents into a research log at the end of the day.  Filling my
research log also makes me feel like I'm **Done™**, and will be the subject
of its own blog post soon.

The conclusion is that in grad school, there don't seem to be as many
milestones as what I'm used to, the ones that exist will be mostly be
opportunities to receive negative feedback, and, importantly, *I have to
hold myself accountable for my own progress.*
